benchmarks/README.md, before:

# KyroDB Benchmarks

This directory contains tools for benchmarking KyroDB against standard ANN benchmarks.

## Quick Start

### 1. Start KyroDB Server

```bash
# From repository root
cargo run --release --bin kyrodb_server
```

### 2. Run Local Benchmarks

```bash
# Install dependencies (pinned for reproducibility)
python3 -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r benchmarks/requirements.txt

# Run on SIFT-128 dataset
python benchmarks/run_benchmark.py --dataset sift-128-euclidean --k 10
```

Notes:
- The running `kyrodb_server` must be configured with the correct embedding dimension and distance metric for the dataset.
- The benchmark runner records dataset SHA-256 and basic environment metadata into the result JSON.

### 3. View Results

Results are saved to `benchmarks/results/` as JSON files.

---

## Directory Structure

```
benchmarks/
├── _generated/             # Generated Python gRPC stubs (auto; ignored by git)
├── ann-benchmarks/          # Files for ann-benchmarks integration
│   ├── __init__.py        # Package marker
│   ├── module.py          # BaseANN wrapper (upstream-compatible)
│   ├── config.yml         # ann-benchmarks algorithm definition
│   ├── Dockerfile         # Docker build (upstream ann-benchmarks repo context)
├── benchmark.toml           # Default VM benchmark config
├── run_benchmark.py        # Local benchmark runner
├── scripts/                # VM benchmark helpers
│   └── vm_ann_suite.sh      # VM ANN suite runner
├── data/                   # Downloaded datasets (auto-created)
├── VM_BENCHMARK_PROTOCOL.md # VM benchmark protocol and reporting
└── results/                # Benchmark results (auto-created)
```

---

## Running on Azure VM

For a repeatable, VM-ready end-to-end suite (dataset × ef_search × concurrency), use:

```bash
bash benchmarks/scripts/vm_ann_suite.sh
```

Protocol details and reporting expectations are in `benchmarks/VM_BENCHMARK_PROTOCOL.md`.

### 1. Setup VM (Standard FX32ms v2)

```bash
# SSH to VM
ssh azureuser@<vm-ip>

# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/vatskishan03/KyroDB.git -b benchmark
cd KyroDB

# Install Rust
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
source ~/.cargo/env

# Build release binary (reproducible)
cargo build --release --locked --bin kyrodb_server
```

### 2. Run Server with Performance Tuning

```bash
# Increase file descriptors
ulimit -n 65536

# Set CPU affinity for server (use first 16 cores)
taskset -c 0-15 ./target/release/kyrodb_server --config benchmarks/benchmark.toml &
```

### 3. Run Benchmarks

```bash
# Install Python deps (pinned for reproducibility)
python3 -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r benchmarks/requirements.txt

# Run the canonical suite (dataset × ef_search × concurrency)
bash benchmarks/scripts/vm_ann_suite.sh
```

---

## ANN-Benchmarks Integration

To add KyroDB to the official ann-benchmarks:

### 1. Fork ann-benchmarks

```bash
git clone https://github.com/erikbern/ann-benchmarks
cd ann-benchmarks
```

### 2. Copy KyroDB Algorithm

```bash
mkdir -p ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb
```

### 3. Build Docker Image

```bash
# Copy KyroDB algorithm folder into ann-benchmarks
mkdir -p ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb
cp /path/to/KyroDB/benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/Dockerfile ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb/Dockerfile
cp /path/to/KyroDB/benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/module.py ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb/module.py
cp /path/to/KyroDB/benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/__init__.py ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb/__init__.py
cp /path/to/KyroDB/benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/config.yml ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb/config.yml

# Note: protobuf stubs are generated during the Docker build from KyroDB's proto.

# Build image (NOTE: ann-benchmarks install.py accepts --build-arg only once
# and expects multiple KEY=VALUE pairs after that single flag)
python install.py --algorithm kyrodb \
    --build-arg KYRODB_GIT=https://github.com/vatskishan03/KyroDB.git KYRODB_REF=benchmark

# If Docker build fails with: "lock file version `4` was found"
# you are using an older Rust/Cargo builder image. Use the updated
# `benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/Dockerfile` which pins a newer Rust version.

# If Docker build fails with:
#   feature `edition2024` is required
# your builder image is too old. `benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/Dockerfile` pins
# a Rust toolchain new enough to build dependencies that have moved to Rust 2024.

# If your ann-benchmarks repo has large `data/` or `results/` directories, Docker
# will send a huge build context and builds will be slow/flaky. Before `install.py`:
#   rm -rf data results
```

### 4. Run Benchmarks

```bash
python run.py --algorithm kyrodb --dataset sift-128-euclidean
python plot.py --dataset sift-128-euclidean
```

### 5. Submit PR

Submit a pull request to `erikbern/ann-benchmarks` with your algorithm.

---

## Performance Targets

| Dataset   | Recall@10 | Target QPS | Current Status |
| --------- | --------- | ---------- | -------------- |
| SIFT-1M   | 0.95      | >15,000    | Testing        |
| GloVe-100 | 0.95      | >20,000    | Testing        |
| GIST-960  | 0.95      | >5,000     | Testing        |

---

## Datasets

| Name                | Dimension | Train Size | Test Size | Metric |
| ------------------- | --------- | ---------- | --------- | ------ |
| sift-128-euclidean  | 128       | 1,000,000  | 10,000    | L2     |
| glove-100-angular   | 100       | 1,183,514  | 10,000    | Cosine |
| gist-960-euclidean  | 960       | 1,000,000  | 1,000     | L2     |
| mnist-784-euclidean | 784       | 60,000     | 10,000    | L2     |

Datasets are automatically downloaded when you run the benchmark.

Commit message:

Refactored training task spawning in tests for improved readability
- Updated the spawning of training tasks in multiple test files to enhance code clarity by formatting the function call across multiple lines.
- Adjusted the `max_wal_size_bytes` parameter in various tests and configurations to 1 MB for consistency and performance tuning.
- Added a new soak test script for 12-hour endurance testing of KyroDB ANN search, including environment checks and server health monitoring.
- Implemented regression tests for cache invalidation on insert, tombstone compaction in HNSW backend, and unique snapshot filename generation.
- Updated configuration files to remove deprecated options and clarify settings related to caching and persistence.

benchmarks/README.md, after:

# KyroDB Benchmarks

This directory contains tools for benchmarking KyroDB against standard ANN benchmarks.

## Quick Start

### 1. Start KyroDB Server

```bash
# From repository root
cargo run --release --bin kyrodb_server
```

### 2. Run Local Benchmarks

```bash
# Install dependencies (pinned for reproducibility)
python3 -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r benchmarks/requirements.txt

# Run on SIFT-128 dataset
python benchmarks/run_benchmark.py --dataset sift-128-euclidean --k 10
```

Notes:
- The running `kyrodb_server` must be configured with the correct embedding dimension and distance metric for the dataset.
- The benchmark runner records dataset SHA-256 and basic environment metadata into the result JSON.
  Configure these via the server config file (`hnsw.dimension` and `hnsw.distance`) passed to `kyrodb_server`.
  Example: set `hnsw.dimension=128` and `hnsw.distance=euclidean` for `sift-128-euclidean`. See the main README configuration section for details.

### 3. View Results

Results are saved to `benchmarks/results/` as JSON files.

---

## Directory Structure

```
benchmarks/
├── _generated/             # Generated Python gRPC stubs (auto; ignored by git)
├── ann-benchmarks/          # Files for ann-benchmarks integration
│   ├── __init__.py        # Package marker
│   ├── module.py          # BaseANN wrapper (upstream-compatible)
│   ├── config.yml         # ann-benchmarks algorithm definition
│   ├── Dockerfile         # Docker build (upstream ann-benchmarks repo context)
├── benchmark.toml           # Default VM benchmark config
├── run_benchmark.py        # Local benchmark runner
├── scripts/                # VM benchmark helpers
│   ├── vm_ann_suite.sh      # VM ANN suite runner
│   └── soak_12h.sh          # 12-hour soak test harness
├── data/                   # Downloaded datasets (auto-created)
├── VM_BENCHMARK_PROTOCOL.md # VM benchmark protocol and reporting
└── results/                # Benchmark results (auto-created)
```

---

## Running on Azure VM

For a repeatable, VM-ready end-to-end suite (dataset × ef_search × concurrency), use:

```bash
bash benchmarks/scripts/vm_ann_suite.sh
```

Protocol details and reporting expectations are in `benchmarks/VM_BENCHMARK_PROTOCOL.md`.

## 12-Hour Soak Test

The soak harness runs repeated query-only benchmark passes for a fixed duration
after an initial indexing pass. Use this to validate stability, memory bounds,
and latency tails over long periods.

```bash
SOAK_DATASET=glove-100-angular \
SOAK_EF_SEARCH=200 \
SOAK_CONCURRENCY=16 \
SOAK_DURATION_HOURS=12 \
bash benchmarks/scripts/soak_12h.sh
```

Optional overrides:
- `SOAK_MAX_TRAIN` to truncate the dataset for local iteration (recomputes ground truth).
- `SOAK_CONFIG` to supply a custom server config instead of auto-generated defaults.

### 1. Setup VM (Standard FX32ms v2)

```bash
# SSH to VM
ssh azureuser@<vm-ip>

# Clone repository
git clone https://github.com/vatskishan03/KyroDB.git
cd KyroDB

# Install Rust
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
source ~/.cargo/env

# Build release binary (reproducible)
cargo build --release --locked --bin kyrodb_server
```

### 2. Run Server with Performance Tuning

```bash
# Increase file descriptors
ulimit -n 65536

# Set CPU affinity for server (use first 16 cores)
taskset -c 0-15 ./target/release/kyrodb_server --config benchmarks/benchmark.toml &
```

### 3. Run Benchmarks

```bash
# Install Python deps (pinned for reproducibility)
python3 -m venv .venv && source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r benchmarks/requirements.txt

# Run the canonical suite (dataset × ef_search × concurrency)
bash benchmarks/scripts/vm_ann_suite.sh
```

---

## ANN-Benchmarks Integration

To add KyroDB to the official ann-benchmarks:

### 1. Fork ann-benchmarks

```bash
git clone https://github.com/erikbern/ann-benchmarks
cd ann-benchmarks
```

### 2. Copy KyroDB Algorithm
Create the algorithm directory and copy the KyroDB wrapper files below.

### 3. Build Docker Image

```bash
# Copy KyroDB algorithm folder into ann-benchmarks
mkdir -p ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb
cp /path/to/KyroDB/benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/Dockerfile ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb/Dockerfile
cp /path/to/KyroDB/benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/module.py ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb/module.py
cp /path/to/KyroDB/benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/__init__.py ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb/__init__.py
cp /path/to/KyroDB/benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/config.yml ann_benchmarks/algorithms/kyrodb/config.yml

# Note: protobuf stubs are generated during the Docker build from KyroDB's proto.

# Build image (NOTE: ann-benchmarks install.py accepts --build-arg only once
# and expects multiple KEY=VALUE pairs after that single flag)
python install.py --algorithm kyrodb \
    --build-arg KYRODB_GIT=https://github.com/vatskishan03/KyroDB.git KYRODB_REF=main

# If Docker build fails with: "lock file version `4` was found"
# you are using an older Rust/Cargo builder image. Use the updated
# `benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/Dockerfile` which pins a newer Rust version.

# If Docker build fails with:
#   feature `edition2024` is required
# your builder image is too old. `benchmarks/ann-benchmarks/Dockerfile` pins
# a Rust toolchain new enough to build dependencies that have moved to Rust 2024.

# If your ann-benchmarks repo has large `data/` or `results/` directories, Docker
# will send a huge build context and builds will be slow/flaky. Before `install.py`:
#   rm -rf data results
```

### 4. Run Benchmarks

```bash
python run.py --algorithm kyrodb --dataset sift-128-euclidean
python plot.py --dataset sift-128-euclidean
```

### 5. Submit PR

Submit a pull request to `erikbern/ann-benchmarks` with your algorithm.

---

## Performance Targets

| Dataset   | Recall@10 | Target QPS | Current Status |
| --------- | --------- | ---------- | -------------- |
| SIFT-1M   | 0.95      | >15,000    | Testing        |
| GloVe-100 | 0.95      | >20,000    | Testing        |
| GIST-960  | 0.95      | >5,000     | Testing        |

---

## Datasets

| Name                | Dimension | Train Size | Test Size | Metric |
| ------------------- | --------- | ---------- | --------- | ------ |
| sift-128-euclidean  | 128       | 1,000,000  | 10,000    | L2     |
| glove-100-angular   | 100       | 1,183,514  | 10,000    | Cosine |
| gist-960-euclidean  | 960       | 1,000,000  | 1,000     | L2     |
| mnist-784-euclidean | 784       | 60,000     | 10,000    | L2     |

Datasets are automatically downloaded when you run the benchmark.
